In this lecture, you'll learn some HSRP advanced topics, including priority and pre-emption and a way
that we can get load balancing with HSRP.
So, I'll start off with priority and pre-emption.
You can choose which router will be the active by setting priority on the routers when you do the configuration. The router
with the higher priority will be preferred.
If you don't set the priority, it will default to 100. In the event of a tie,
the highest IP address wins.
If pre-emption is also enabled, when a higher priority router comes back online after the failure, it will transition
back to active.
So let's say for example, we've got our HSRP routers R1 and R2, and we give R1 a higher priority and
we also enable pre-emption on there. Well,
if R1 fails, R2 will take over and become active. When R1 comes back up again,
if we've enabled pre-emption, then R1 will transition back to active. If we haven't enabled pre-emption,
so maybe we've just enabled priority but we haven't enabled pre-emption, in that case, then R2 will remain
the active router. R1 will not come back online as active again.
And if you don't enable pre-emption, that can be more stable, because let's say that R1 has got some kind
of intermittent issue where it's flapping up and down,
so it's coming up, going down, coming up, going down.
Well, if you've enabled priority and pre-emption, the active is going to go to R1 then R2,
then R1, then R2.
There's going to be a short outage each time that happens.
So often, it's a better idea not to enable pre-emption.
For configuring this, so on R1, this is going to be our preffered router. We do our normal HSRP configuration
first, so on interface GigabitEthernet0/1, we've got the standard interface configuration
with the 'ip address 10.10.10.2 255.255.255.0' and 'no shutdown'.
We then have our HSRP command 'standby 1 ip 10.10.10.1', and then the additional commands for priority
and pre-emption,
'standby 1 priority 110' and 'standby 1 preempt'. On R2,
we have the normal interface configuration where we're giving it 'ip address 10.10.10.3 255.255.255.0' and
'no shutdown', 'standby 1 ip 10.10.10.1', the same virtual IP address that we have on R1,
and on R2,
we've said 'standby 1 priority 90'. The default priority is 100,
so here, R1 will be preferred because the higher value is better.
We have enabled pre-emption here.
If we hadn't put in that command on R1, 'standby 1 preempt', then R1 would be preferred when
both routers come up at the same time.
But if R1 fails over to R2, when R1 comes back again, it would remain R2 being
active.
Okay, so that's priority and pre-emption.
Another thing that we can configure is the version. HSRP version 2 introduced a few minor improvements.
So real-world,
you'll often see people still running on version 1, and the default is version 1.
Both routers must be running the same versions, so if you do enable version 2, make sure that you enable
it on both routers.
The configuration for the version is just one additional command 'standby version 2'.
Now, for verifying these commands, it's the normal command to verify HSRP, 'show standby'.
I'll come out of fullscreen mode again to highlight
some of these for you.
Okay, so we can see that Group 1 is active, virtual IP is 10.10.10.1. we can see the MAC address,
the virtual MAC address there as well.
So, we covered a lot in the last lecture.
The new settings here, I can see that pre-emption is enabled and the active router is local because on here,
the priority is 110. On the standby router, which is our R2 at 10.10.10.3,
the priority is 90.
So whenever R1 is up, it will be the active router.
Okay, so I do have one other slide to show you here.
So, this is about how we can get active/active HSRP. Now, for the same IP subnet,
it's always going to be active/standby.
But if you've got different IP subnets on the inside, you're going to have different VLANs there
as well,
then for our two routers, R1 and R2, you can have R1 active for one IP subnet, and R2
active for a different IP subnet,
or if you had four IP subnets, you could have two on each.
So the example here, let's say that our Engineering PCs are in the 10.10.10.0 subnet and our Sales
PCs are in the 10.10.20.0/24 subnet. So here, I'm going to have my Engineering PCs are
going to be sending their traffic through R1.
My Sales PCs are going to be sending their traffic through R2. This also shows you an example
where you would want to use priority and pre-emption.
So on R1, I configured it on interface Gig0/1 with IP address 10.10.10.2,
'no shutdown', 'standby 1 ip 10.10.10.1', and I gave it priority 110 and preempt.
On R2, for the 10.10.10 subnet,
it's got physical address
10.10.10.103,
'no shutdown',
'standby 1 ip 10.10.10.10.1', and 'standby 1 priority 90'.
So, R1 is going to be the preferred default gateway at
10.10.10.1 for my Engineering PCs.
For my Sales PCs, I flip it around.
So on R1, I give the IP address 10.10.20.3 on the physical interface.
The virtual IP is 10.10.20.1 and R2 gets the higher priority 110 and preemption. On R1
it's got priority 90.
So you can see here that R1 will be active for my Engineering PCs. R2 will be active for my
Sales PCs.
So that's a way that you can get load balancing through both gateways when you're using HSRP, but it's
only going to work when you do it across different IP subnets. For the same IP subnet,
it's going to be active/standby.
Okay, so that was everything for HSRP, for the CCNA.
See you in the next section.